22009beta (#2413)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2022-08-04-jakarta-core-profile-22009-beta.adoc

* link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/json-p-b.html[Open Liberty JSON-P and JSON-B Documentation]
* link:https://javaee.github.io/jsonp/getting-started.html[Jakarta JSON Processing - Getting Started]
* link:https://javaee.github.io/jsonb-spec/getting-started.html[Jakarta JSON Binding - Getting Started]
* link:{url-prefix}/guides/rest-client-java.html[Open Liberty REST Client Guide]

[#cdi]
== CDI 4.0
CDI allows objects to be bound to lifecycle contexts, to be injected, to be associated with interceptors and decorators, and to interact in a loosely coupled fashion by firing and observing events.
As part of Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile, CDI 4.0 brings some functional updates and removes some previously deprecated APIs. This update also brings in new Jakarta EE 10 versions of the Jakarta Annotations and Jakarta Interceptors APIs.
Support has been added for Build Compatibile Extensions, along with a new Metamodel that is less dependent on reflection at runtime.

[source, java]
----
public class MyExtension implements BuildCompatibleExtension {
    @Enhancement(type=MyFooService.class)
    public void foo(ClassConfig clazz) {
        clazz.addAnnotation(MyQualifier.class)
    }
}
----

> * In previous versions of CDI, an empty `beans.xml` file indicated that an archive should be treated as an Explicit Bean Archive (the equivalent of `bean-discovery-mode="all"`). In CDI 4.0, an empty `beans.xml` will now cause an archive to be treated as an Implicit Bean Archive (the equivalent of `bean-discovery-mode="annotated"`). Should it be needed, a configuration option has been provided to enable compatibility with previous versions.

Author: ```suggestion
In previous versions of CDI, an empty `beans.xml` file indicated that an archive should be treated as an Explicit Bean Archive (the equivalent of `bean-discovery-mode="all"`). In CDI 4.0, an empty `beans.xml` will now cause an archive to be treated as an Implicit Bean Archive (the equivalent of `bean-discovery-mode="annotated"`). Should it be needed, a configuration option has been provided to enable compatibility with previous versions.
```

In previous versions of CDI, a non-empty `beans.xml` file that did not include a version attribute defaulted to mean `bean-discovery-mode="all"`. In CDI 4.0, it defaults to `bean-discovery-mode="annotated"`.

Two new Observable Container State Events are added: Startup and Shutdown. Applications can listen for these events to be notified when the CDI container is starting up and being shut down.

A new Handle API is added to make programatic lookup of Beans and Instances easier.

In Jakarta Annotations 2.1, the `@priority` annotation can now be applied to any program element. This annotation is used by CDI 4.0 to allow Stereotypes to include a Priority annotation.

> The following previously deprecated CDI APIs are removed.

Author: ```suggestion
The following previously deprecated CDI APIs are removed:  

```

The `emptyBeansXmlCDI3Compatibility` attribute applies only to CDI 4.0.
If set to `true`, then an archive that contains an empty `beans.xml` file is treated as an Explicit Bean Archive, as it was in CDI 3.0 and earlier.

If set to `false`, which is the default, then an archive that contains an empty `beans.xml` file is treated as an Implicit Bean Archive. This is equivalent to setting `bean-discovery-mode="annotated"`.

[source, xml]
----
<featureManager>
  <feature>cdi-4.0</feature>
</featureManager>

<cdi enableImplicitBeanArchives="false" emptyBeansXmlCDI3Compatibility="true"/>
----

[#expression]
== Jakarta EE 10 Expression Language 5.0

The `expressionLanguage-5.0` feature is an implementation of the Expression Language 5.0 specification for Jakarta EE 10. The Expression Language 5.0 includes a number of new features and specification clarifications.

To learn about the changes between the Expression Language 4.0 and Expression Language 5.0, see the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/jakarta-expression-language-spec-5.0.html#changes-between-5-0-and-4-0[Expression Language 5.0 spec documentation].

> One of the new features is the addition of the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/apidocs/jakarta.el/jakarta/el/methodreference[MethodReference] which "...provides information about the method to which a method expression resolves." This new class aenables you to access any annotations that are present on a particular method by using the `getAnnotations()` method. The Expression Language 5.0 specification also includes a few deprecations and clarifications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the new features is the addition of the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/apidocs/jakarta.el/jakarta/el/methodreference[MethodReference] which "...provides information about the method to which a method expression resolves." This new class enables you to access any annotations that are present on a particular method by using the `getAnnotations()` method. The Expression Language 5.0 specification also includes a few deprecations and clarifications.
```

# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/reece-nana
author_github: https://github.com/reece-nana
seo-title: Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile makes it debut in Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta brings you the hot off the press Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile. Jakarta EE 10 is the first release to provide updates to the Jakarta EE specifications since Java EE 8 in 2017.  MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1 and Password Utilities 1.1 are also made available in this beta release.
blog_description: Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta brings you the hot off the press Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile. Jakarta EE 10 is the first release to provide updates to the Jakarta EE specifications since Java EE 8 in 2017.  MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1 and Password Utilities 1.1 are also made available in this beta release.
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
---
= Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile makes it debut in Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta
Reece Nana <https://github.com/reece-nana>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

> Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta brings you the hot off the press Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile. Jakarta EE 10 is the first release that provides some updates to the Jakarta EE specifications since Java EE 8 in 2017. While Jakarta EE 10 release is around the corner, Open Liberty has consumed many of the Jakarta EE 10 specifications and put them in the 22.0.0.9-beta.  In this beta release, the features that make up the new Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile are made available: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta brings you the hot off the press [Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile](https://jakarta.ee/specifications/coreprofile/10/). Jakarta EE 10 is the first release that provides some updates to the Jakarta EE specifications since Java EE 8 in 2017. While Jakarta EE 10 release is around the corner, Open Liberty has consumed many of the Jakarta EE 10 specifications and put them in the 22.0.0.9-beta.  In this beta release, the features that make up the new Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile are made available: 
```

> Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta brings you the hot off the press [Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile](https://jakarta.ee/specifications/coreprofile/10/). Jakarta EE 10 is the first release that provides some updates to the Jakarta EE specifications since Java EE 8 in 2017. While Jakarta EE 10 release is around the corner, Open Liberty has consumed many of the Jakarta EE 10 specifications and put them in the 22.0.0.9-beta.  In this beta release, the features that make up the new Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile are made available: 

Author: ```suggestion
Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta brings you the hot off the press link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/coreprofile/10/[Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile]. Jakarta EE 10 is the first release that provides some updates to the Jakarta EE specifications since Java EE 8 in 2017. While Jakarta EE 10 release is around the corner, Open Liberty has consumed many of the Jakarta EE 10 specifications and put them in the 22.0.0.9-beta.  In this beta release, the features that make up the new Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile are made available: 
```

* Jakarta RESTful Web Services 3.1: support multipart/form-data.

> * Jakarta JSON-B 3.0: deserialization of null to JsonValue.NULL, default PropertyVisibilityStrategy Implemenation etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Jakarta JSON-B 3.0: deserialization of null to JsonValue.NULL; default PropertyVisibilityStrategy Implemenation, etc.
```

> * Jakarta JSON-B 3.0: deserialization of null to JsonValue.NULL; default PropertyVisibilityStrategy Implemenation, etc.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Jakarta JSON-B 3.0: polymorphic serialization/deserialization; deserialization of null to JsonValue.NULL, etc.
```

* Jakarta JSON-P 2.1: handling duplicated keys; defined more interfaces for primitives, lists and objects 
* Jakarta CDI 4.0: defining new extension APIs; removing reflections; adding new reflection-free language model; empty beans.xml means that only annotated classes are beans; removal of deprecated APIs

> ** Jakarta Annotation 2.1: allowing `@Priority` to be used on any program elements; adding `@Nullable` and `@NotNull`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Jakarta Annotation 2.1: allowing `@Priority` to be used on any program element; adding `@Nullable` and `@NotNull`
```

Author: I purposefully nested annotation and interceptor under CDI, since, to my knowledge, that's how they're made available in Liberty (aka, you can't enable those independently).

Author: ```suggestion
** Jakarta Annotation 2.1: allowing `@Priority` to be used on any program element; adding `@Nullable` and `@NotNull`
```

> ** Jakarta Interceptors 2.1: picking up the changes from Annotation 2.1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Jakarta Interceptors 2.1: picking up the changes from Annotation 2.1
```

Author: I purposefully nested annotation and interceptor under CDI, since, to my knowledge, that's how they're made available in Liberty (aka, you can't enable those independently). If this is incorrect, or you feel we should keep these at a single level because of X, let me know

In addition to the Core Profile features, Jakarta EE 10 Expression Language 5.0 is also included in this beta and provides a number of new features and specification clarifications.   

But it's not just Jakarta features that are making their debut in this release!  MicroProfile OpenAPI has been updated to version 3.1, and with it provides the ability to specify optional authentication for operations and multiple annotation enhancements.  Last but not least, Password Utilities 1.1 is introduced in this beta, and with it the ability to no longer forcefully federate stand-alone user registries.

The link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 22.0.0.9-beta includes the following beta features (along with all GA features):

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile
```

> * <<restful, RESTful Web Services 3.1>>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
** <<restful, RESTful Web Services 3.1>>
```

> * <<json, Jakarta JSON Binding and Processing>>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
** <<json, Jakarta JSON Binding and Processing>>
```

> * <<cdi, CDI 4.0>>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
** <<cdi, CDI 4.0>>
```

* <<expression, Jakarta EE 10 Expression Language 5.0>>
* <<microprofile, MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1>>
* <<password, Password Utilities 1.1>>

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
More information about Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile can be found [here](https://jakarta.ee/specifications/coreprofile/10/).
```

Author: I don't think we need this since the link was added to the opening paragraph.

> The link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 22.0.0.9-beta includes the following beta features (along with all GA features):
> * Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile
> ** <<restful, RESTful Web Services 3.1>>
> ** <<json, Jakarta JSON Binding and Processing>>
> ** <<cdi, CDI 4.0>>
> * <<expression, Jakarta EE 10 Expression Language 5.0>>
> * <<microprofile, MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1>>
> * <<password, Password Utilities 1.1>>

Author: ```suggestion
The link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 22.0.0.9-beta includes the following beta features (along with all GA features):

* Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile
** <<restful, RESTful Web Services 3.1>>
** <<json, Jakarta JSON Binding and Processing>>
** <<cdi, CDI 4.0>>
* <<expression, Jakarta EE 10 Expression Language 5.0>>
* <<microprofile, MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1>>
* <<password, Password Utilities 1.1>>
```

[#restful]
== RESTful Web Services 3.1

> RESTful Web Services 3.1 (also known as Jakarta Rest 3.1 and formerly known as JAX-RS) is now available in the Open Liberty 22.0.0.9 beta! The 3.1 implementation is an EE10 technology, uses the package name (`jakarta.*`), and the implementation is based on RESTEasy. Please see `Appendix D.1. Changes Since 3.0 Release` of the Jakarta RESTful Web Services link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/3.1/jakarta-restful-ws-spec-3.1.pdf[specification] for information on the changes provided in this release.

Author: ```suggestion
RESTful Web Services 3.1 (also known as Jakarta Rest 3.1 and formerly known as JAX-RS) is now available in the Open Liberty 22.0.0.9 beta! The 3.1 implementation is an EE10 technology, uses the package name (`jakarta.*`), and the implementation is based on RESTEasy. For more information on the changes provided in this release, reference the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/3.1/jakarta-restful-ws-spec-3.1.html#changes-since-3.0-release[Changes Since 3.0 Release section] of the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/3.1/jakarta-restful-ws-spec-3.1.html[Jakarta RESTful Web Services Spec].
```

Give it a try - and if you encounter any issues, please let us know!

You can enable RESTful Web Services 3.1 by using the `restfulWS-3.1` feature in the `server.xml`. If you only need a RESTful client, then you can use the `restfulWSClient-3.1` feature instead.

If you want to learn more about RESTful Web Services or see what is coming in future releases, please visit the link:https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/ee4j.rest[community page].

[#json]
== Jakarta JSON Binding and Processing
The Jakarta JSON Processing specification allows users to parse and generate JSON strings. The Jakarta JSON Binding specification is built on top of JSON Processing and allows users to serialize and deserialize Java objects into JSON.

> The Jakarta JSON Processing specification has been updated with enhancements for handling duplicate keys when parsing JSON, and better handling of `java.lang.Number` subclasses when generating JSON strings. The Jakarta JSON Binding specification has been updated to support polymorphism. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Jakarta JSON Processing specification has been updated with enhancements for handling duplicate keys when parsing JSON, and better handling of `java.lang.Number` superclass when generating JSON strings. The Jakarta JSON Binding specification has been updated to support polymorphism. 
```

Open Liberty provides default implementations for both Jakarta JSON Processing and Binding. For JSON Processing we provide users with the Parsson implementation. For JSON Binding we provide users with the Yasson implementation.
To get these default implementations you can enable the `jsonp-2.1` and/or `jsonb-3.0`` features.

[source, xml]
----
<featureManager>
    <feature>jsonb-3.0</feature>
    <feature>jsonp-2.1</feature>
</featureManager>
----

> If you want to use another Jakarta JSON Processing 2.1 or Binding 3.0 implementation you can do so by enabling the `jsonpContainer-2.1` and `jsonbContainer-3.0` features respectively. The JSON Container features require users to configure Basic Extensions using Liberty Libraries (BELLs) that point to their third-party implementations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you want to use a third-party Jakarta JSON Processing 2.1 or Binding 3.0 implementation you can do so by enabling the `jsonpContainer-2.1` and `jsonbContainer-3.0` features respectively. The JSON Container features require users to configure a Basic Extensions using Liberty Libraries (BELLs) element that points to their third-party implementation(s).
```

[source, xml]
----
<featureManager>
    <feature>jsonbContainer-3.0</feature>
    <feature>jsonpContainer-2.1</feature>
</featureManager>

<library id="myJsonBindingProvider">
  <file name="${path.to.json.binding.provider}"/>
</library>

<bell libraryRef="myJsonBindingProvider"/>

<library id="myJsonProcessingProvider">
  <file name="${path.to.json.processing.provider}"/>
</library>

<bell libraryRef="myJsonProcessingProvider"/>
----

> NOTE: When you enable `jsonb-3.0` or `jsonbContainer-3.0` the `jsonp-2.1` feature is automatically enabled. However, enabling the jsonpContainer-3.0 feature will supersede the `jsonp-2.1` feature and allow the user to provide their own implementation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
NOTE: When you enable `jsonb-3.0` or `jsonbContainer-3.0` the `jsonp-2.1` feature is automatically enabled. However, enabling the `jsonpContainer-2.1` feature will supersede the `jsonp-2.1` feature and allow the user to provide a third-party implementation.
```

You can find out more about this specific update (eg Open Liberty docs, Javadoc) and/or the wider technology via the following links:

* link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/json-p-b.html[Open Liberty JSON-P and JSON-B Documentation]

> * link:https://javaee.github.io/jsonp/getting-started.html[Jakarta JSON Processing]
> * link:https://javaee.github.io/jsonb-spec/getting-started.html[Jakarta JSON Binding]

Author: ```suggestion
* link:https://javaee.github.io/jsonp/getting-started.html[Jakarta JSON Processing - Getting Started]
* link:https://javaee.github.io/jsonb-spec/getting-started.html[Jakarta JSON Binding - Getting Started]
```

[source, xml]
----
<cdi enableImplicitBeanArchives="false" emptyBeansXmlCDI3Compatibility="true"/>
----

* The attribute `enableImplicitBeanArchives` is the same as it was in previous versions.
If set to `true` (default) then archives which do not contain a `beans.xml` file will be treated as Implicit Bean Archives and will be scanned for classes that have Bean Defining Annotations.
If set to `false` then archives which do not contain a `beans.xml` file will be not be scanned for annotated classes.

* The attribute `emptyBeansXmlCDI3Compatibility` only applies to CDI 4.0.
If set to `true` then an archive which contains an empty `beans.xml` file will be treated as an Explicit Bean Archive (as it was in CDI 3.0 and earlier)

* If set to `false` (default) then an archive which contains an empty `beans.xml` file will be treated as an Implicit Bean Archive. This is the equivalent to setting `bean-discovery-mode="annotated"`.

[source, xml]
----
<featureManager>
  <feature>cdi-4.0</feature>
</featureManager>

<cdi enableImplicitBeanArchives="false" emptyBeansXmlCDI3Compatibility="true"/>
----

[#expression]
== Jakarta EE 10 Expression Language 5.0

> The `expressionLanguage-5.0` feature is an implementation of the Expression Language 5.0 Specification for Jakarta EE 10. The Expression Language 5.0 includes a number of new features and specification clarifications. A link to the Expression Language 5.0 specification can be found link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/[here].

Author: ```suggestion
The `expressionLanguage-5.0` feature is an implementation of the Expression Language 5.0 specification for Jakarta EE 10. The Expression Language 5.0 includes a number of new features and specification clarifications.
```

> The following link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/jakarta-expression-language-spec-5.0.html#changes-between-5-0-and-4-0[link] shows the change history of the Specification between the Expression Language 4.0 and Expression Language 5.0.

Author: ```suggestion
To learn about the changes between the Expression Language 4.0 and Expression Language 5.0, reference the  link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/jakarta-expression-language-spec-5.0.html#changes-between-5-0-and-4-0[Expression Language 5.0 spec documentation].
```

One of the new features is the addition of the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/apidocs/jakarta.el/jakarta/el/methodreference[MethodReference] which "Provides information about the method to which a method expression resolves." This new class allows developers to access any annotations present on a particular method using the `getAnnotations()` method. There are also a few deprecations and clarifications within the Expression Language 5.0 Specification.

[source,xml]
----
   <featureManager>
        <feature>expressionLanguage-5.0</feature>
    </featureManager>
----

> The Jakarta Expression Language 5.0 Specification and Javadocs can be found link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/[here].

Author: ```suggestion
More information regarding Jakarta Expression Language 5.0 can be  found on the 
link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/[jakarta.ee site].
```

[#microprofile]
== MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1 

OpenAPI is a standardised way of documenting REST APIs in a JSON or YAML format. MicroProfile OpenAPI helps you generate and serve OpenAPI documentation for your REST applications built using JAX-RS or Jakarta restfulWS. This can be useful for developers to test out the API during development, or for people using the API in production.

To use it, add the `mpOpenAPI-3.1` feature to your server.xml, deploy your rest application and then visit `/openapi` to view the OpenAPI documentation, or visit `/openapi/ui` for a user interface that lets you browse through it. You can enhance the documentation using annotations to add things like textual descriptions to each method. The annotations are available as a maven dependency:

[source, xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.eclipse.microprofile.openapi</groupId>
    <artifactId>microprofile-openapi-api</artifactId>
    <version>3.1-RC2</version>
</dependency>
----

> Version 3.1 is a small release which includes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Version 3.1 is a minor release which includes:
```

* Some Jakarta Bean Validation annotations will now be read and their restrictions will be added to object schemas
* Most annotations now include an `extension` attribute
* `@SecurityRequirementsSet` can now be used to document operations where authentication is optional or where more than one authentication mechanism is required

More information about MicroProfile OpenAPI can be found in:

* link:https://openliberty.io/guides/microprofile-openapi.html[Open Liberty MicroProfile OpenAPI guide]

> * link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/documentation-openapi.html[Open Liberty OpenAPI documentation]

Reviewer 4: Should both of these links use `{url-prefix}` ?

Author: ```suggestion
* link:{url-prefix}/guides/microprofile-openapi.html[Open Liberty MicroProfile OpenAPI guide]
* link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/documentation-openapi.html[Open Liberty OpenAPI documentation]
```

---
layout: post

> title: "Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile makes it debut in Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile debuts in Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta"
```

# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/reece-nana
author_github: https://github.com/reece-nana

> seo-title: Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile makes it debut in Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta - OpenLiberty.io

Reviewer: ```suggestion
seo-title: Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile debuts in Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta - OpenLiberty.io
```

> seo-description: Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta brings you the hot off the press Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile. Jakarta EE 10 is the first release to provide updates to the Jakarta EE specifications since Java EE 8 in 2017.  MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1 and Password Utilities 1.1 are also made available in this beta release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
seo-description: Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta brings you the hot-off-the-press Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile. Jakarta EE 10 is the first release to update the Jakarta EE specifications since Java EE 8 in 2017.  MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1 and Password Utilities 1.1 are also available in this beta release.
```

> blog_description: Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta brings you the hot off the press Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile. Jakarta EE 10 is the first release to provide updates to the Jakarta EE specifications since Java EE 8 in 2017.  MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1 and Password Utilities 1.1 are also made available in this beta release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
blog_description: Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta brings you the hot-off-the-press Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile. Jakarta EE 10 is the first release to update the Jakarta EE specifications since Java EE 8 in 2017.  MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1 and Password Utilities 1.1 are also available in this beta release
```

open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
---
= Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile makes it debut in Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta
Reece Nana <https://github.com/reece-nana>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

> Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta brings you the hot off the press link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/coreprofile/10/[Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile]. Jakarta EE 10 is the first release that provides some updates to the Jakarta EE specifications since Java EE 8 in 2017. While Jakarta EE 10 release is around the corner, Open Liberty has consumed many of the Jakarta EE 10 specifications and put them in the 22.0.0.9-beta.  In this beta release, the features that make up the new Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile are made available: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta brings you the hot-off-the-press link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/coreprofile/10/[Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile]. Jakarta EE 10 is the first release to update the Jakarta EE specifications since Java EE 8 in 2017. While the Jakarta EE 10 release is still around the corner, Open Liberty has consumed many of the Jakarta EE 10 specifications and put them in the 22.0.0.9-beta.  The features that make up the new Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile are available in this beta release. 
```

> Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta brings you the hot off the press link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/coreprofile/10/[Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile]. Jakarta EE 10 is the first release that provides some updates to the Jakarta EE specifications since Java EE 8 in 2017. While Jakarta EE 10 release is around the corner, Open Liberty has consumed many of the Jakarta EE 10 specifications and put them in the 22.0.0.9-beta.  In this beta release, the features that make up the new Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile are made available: 

Reviewer 5: "the hot-off-the-press Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile" (assuming Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile is really new in itself and we've just implemented it)

> Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta brings you the hot off the press link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/coreprofile/10/[Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile]. Jakarta EE 10 is the first release that provides some updates to the Jakarta EE specifications since Java EE 8 in 2017. While Jakarta EE 10 release is around the corner, Open Liberty has consumed many of the Jakarta EE 10 specifications and put them in the 22.0.0.9-beta.  In this beta release, the features that make up the new Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile are made available: 

Reviewer 5: I think this opening paragraph (ie everything before the sentence "The 22.0.0.9-beta includes the following beta features (along with all GA features):") is too long and gets into too much detail about Jakarta 10 too early. It also doesn't really say what "Core Profile" means. There's also a fair amount of duplication with having both bulleted lists. And the second bulleted list (and sub-headings throughout the blog post) need to focus more on value instead of feature/functions.

How about:

Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta brings you the hot-off-the-press [Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile](https://jakarta.ee/specifications/coreprofile/10/). Jakarta EE 10 will be the first release to provide updates to the specifications since Java EE 8 in 2017. Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile is a subset of the specifications. The Core Profile is specifically aimed at lightweight runtimes, like Open Liberty, that are optimised for running cloud-native Java microservices. While the whole Jakarta EE 10 release is just around the corner, Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta provides a preview of the Core Profile subset of features for you to start exploring now.

As well as Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile, we've included Jakarta EE 10 Expression Language 5.0 in this beta, which provides a number of new features and specification clarifications.

But it’s not just Jakarta EE features that are making their debut in this release. MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1 provides the ability to specify optional authentication for operations and multiple annotation enhancements. Password Utilities 1.1 is introduced in this beta, and with it the ability to no longer forcefully federate stand-alone user registries.

The [Open Liberty](https://blogs-draft-openlibertyio.ng.bluemix.net/) 22.0.0.9-beta includes the following beta features (along with all GA features):

```
* Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile:
** [Support for multipart/form-data content type (RESTful Web Services 3.1)](https://blogs-draft-openlibertyio.ng.bluemix.net/blog/2022/08/04/jakarta-core-profile-22009-beta.html#restful)
** [Enhanced JSON string parsing and new serialization/deserialization options (JSON Processing 2.1 and JSON Binding 3.0)](https://blogs-draft-openlibertyio.ng.bluemix.net/blog/2022/08/04/jakarta-core-profile-22009-beta.html#json)
** [KEY BENEFIT OF RELEASE HERE? (CDI 4.0)](https://blogs-draft-openlibertyio.ng.bluemix.net/blog/2022/08/04/jakarta-core-profile-22009-beta.html#cdi)
* [Access any annotations present on a particular method (Expression Language 5.0)](https://blogs-draft-openlibertyio.ng.bluemix.net/blog/2022/08/04/jakarta-core-profile-22009-beta.html#expression)
* [Document APIs where authentication is optional or complex (MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1)](https://blogs-draft-openlibertyio.ng.bluemix.net/blog/2022/08/04/jakarta-core-profile-22009-beta.html#microprofile)
* [KEY BENEFIT OF RELEASE HERE? (Password Utilities 1.1)](https://blogs-draft-openlibertyio.ng.bluemix.net/blog/2022/08/04/jakarta-core-profile-22009-beta.html#password)
```
"

Then make all the sub-headings match the links in the list above.

* Jakarta RESTful Web Services 3.1: support multipart/form-data.
* Jakarta JSON-B 3.0: polymorphic serialization/deserialization; deserialization of null to JsonValue.NULL, etc.

> * Jakarta JSON-P 2.1: handling duplicated keys; defined more interfaces for primitives, lists and objects 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Jakarta JSON-P 2.1: handling duplicated keys; more interfaces for primitives, lists and objects 
```

* Jakarta CDI 4.0: defining new extension APIs; removing reflections; adding new reflection-free language model; empty beans.xml means that only annotated classes are beans; removal of deprecated APIs
** Jakarta Annotation 2.1: allowing `@Priority` to be used on any program element; adding `@Nullable` and `@NotNull`
** Jakarta Interceptors 2.1: picking up the changes from Annotation 2.1

> In addition to the Core Profile features, Jakarta EE 10 Expression Language 5.0 is also included in this beta and provides a number of new features and specification clarifications.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the Core Profile features, Jakarta EE 10 Expression Language 5.0 is included in this beta and provides new features and specification clarifications.   
```

> But it's not just Jakarta features that are making their debut in this release!  MicroProfile OpenAPI has been updated to version 3.1, and with it provides the ability to specify optional authentication for operations and multiple annotation enhancements.  Last but not least, Password Utilities 1.1 is introduced in this beta, and with it the ability to no longer forcefully federate stand-alone user registries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But it's not only Jakarta EE features that are debuting in this release!  MicroProfile OpenAPI is updated to version 3.1, in which you can specify optional authentication for operations and multiple annotation enhancements.  Last but not least, Password Utilities 1.1 is introduced in this beta, which no longer forcefully federates stand-alone user registries.
```

> But it's not just Jakarta features that are making their debut in this release!  MicroProfile OpenAPI has been updated to version 3.1, and with it provides the ability to specify optional authentication for operations and multiple annotation enhancements.  Last but not least, Password Utilities 1.1 is introduced in this beta, and with it the ability to no longer forcefully federate stand-alone user registries.

Reviewer 5: Always "Jakarta EE" in full (not "Jakarta").

Author: there are instances where it's just Jakarta when it's part of spec, for example Jakarta Rest 3.1 (https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/3.1/).  I've also seen it referenced just as "Jakarta" in various places/blogs, however, I agree we should use "Jakarta EE" where appropriate (like in this instance, so I've updated it).

> The link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 22.0.0.9-beta includes the following beta features (along with all GA features):

Reviewer 5: What do you think of linking "all GA features" (in "(along with all GA features)") to the recent GA release blog post so that the reader can go see what "all GA features" are?

Reviewer 5: If you agree, I'll update the post template.

Author: The previous blog post would not list "all GA features" only new features that GAed in the previous release.  However, I agree with your point that this should be a link and I think we should make it point at https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/reference/feature/feature-overview.html

Author: ```suggestion
The link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 22.0.0.9-beta includes the following beta features (along with link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/feature-overview.html[all GA features]):
```

* Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile
** <<restful, RESTful Web Services 3.1>>
** <<json, Jakarta JSON Binding and Processing>>
** <<cdi, CDI 4.0>>
* <<expression, Jakarta EE 10 Expression Language 5.0>>
* <<microprofile, MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1>>
* <<password, Password Utilities 1.1>>

[#restful]
== RESTful Web Services 3.1

> RESTful Web Services 3.1 (also known as Jakarta Rest 3.1 and formerly known as JAX-RS) is now available in the Open Liberty 22.0.0.9 beta! The 3.1 implementation is an EE10 technology, uses the package name (`jakarta.*`), and the implementation is based on RESTEasy. For more information on the changes provided in this release, reference the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/3.1/jakarta-restful-ws-spec-3.1.html#changes-since-3.0-release[Changes Since 3.0 Release section] of the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/3.1/jakarta-restful-ws-spec-3.1.html[Jakarta RESTful Web Services Spec].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RESTful Web Services 3.1 (also known as Jakarta Rest 3.1 and formerly known as JAX-RS) is now available in the Open Liberty 22.0.0.9 beta. The 3.1 implementation is based on RESTEasy and is  an EE10 technology, which uses the `jakarta.*` package name. For more information on the changes in this release, see the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/3.1/jakarta-restful-ws-spec-3.1.html#changes-since-3.0-release[Changes Since 3.0 Release section] of the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/3.1/jakarta-restful-ws-spec-3.1.html[Jakarta RESTful Web Services Spec].
```

Author: I really dislike using "see" for links.... is there an issue with using "reference" or perhaps another term (as I know we don't want "visit" or "navigate to"?

Reviewer: IBM style recommends "For more information, see..." . In general, the preference should be toward simpler, shorter words whenever possible. But in this case I don't think it matters much, "reference" is ok

Give it a try - and if you encounter any issues, please let us know!

> You can enable RESTful Web Services 3.1 by using the `restfulWS-3.1` feature in the `server.xml`. If you only need a RESTful client, then you can use the `restfulWSClient-3.1` feature instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can enable RESTful Web Services 3.1 by using the `restfulWS-3.1` feature in your `server.xml` file. If you only need a RESTful client,  use the `restfulWSClient-3.1` feature instead.
```

> If you want to learn more about RESTful Web Services or see what is coming in future releases, please visit the link:https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/ee4j.rest[community page].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn more about RESTful Web Services or see what is coming in future releases, visit the link:https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/ee4j.rest[ EE4J community page].
```

> 

Reviewer: Is there a better link for RESTful WS? The EE4J page is not specific to that spec. Maybe https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/ee4j.rest ?

Author: I'm a bit lost; what page are you referencing?  The above link is already for https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/ee4j.rest?

Reviewer: sorry, somehow I ended up on the main EE4J page- disregard

[#json]
== Jakarta JSON Binding and Processing

> The Jakarta JSON Processing specification allows users to parse and generate JSON strings. The Jakarta JSON Binding specification is built on top of JSON Processing and allows users to serialize and deserialize Java objects into JSON.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Jakarta JSON Processing specification enables you to parse and generate JSON strings. The Jakarta JSON Binding specification is built on top of JSON Processing and enables you to serialize and deserialize Java objects into JSON.
```

The Jakarta JSON Processing specification has been updated with enhancements for handling duplicate keys when parsing JSON, and better handling of `java.lang.Number` superclass when generating JSON strings. The Jakarta JSON Binding specification has been updated to support polymorphism. 

> Open Liberty provides default implementations for both Jakarta JSON Processing and Binding. For JSON Processing we provide users with the Parsson implementation. For JSON Binding we provide users with the Yasson implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open Liberty provides default implementations for both Jakarta JSON Processing and Binding. For JSON Processing, we provide the Parsson implementation. For JSON Binding, we provide the Yasson implementation.
```

> To get these default implementations you can enable the `jsonp-2.1` and/or `jsonb-3.0`` features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get these default implementations you can enable the `jsonp-2.1` and `jsonb-3.0` features.
```

[source, xml]
----
<featureManager>
    <feature>jsonb-3.0</feature>
    <feature>jsonp-2.1</feature>
</featureManager>
----

> If you want to use a third-party Jakarta JSON Processing 2.1 or Binding 3.0 implementation you can do so by enabling the `jsonpContainer-2.1` and `jsonbContainer-3.0` features respectively. The JSON Container features require users to configure a Basic Extensions using Liberty Libraries (BELLs) element that points to their third-party implementation(s).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to use a third-party Jakarta JSON Processing 2.1 or Binding 3.0 implementation, you can enable the `jsonpContainer-2.1` or `jsonbContainer-3.0` features. The JSON Container features require you to configure a Basic Extensions using Liberty Libraries (BELLs) element that points to your third-party implementation(s).
```

[source, xml]
----
<featureManager>
    <feature>jsonbContainer-3.0</feature>
    <feature>jsonpContainer-2.1</feature>
</featureManager>

<library id="myJsonBindingProvider">
  <file name="${path.to.json.binding.provider}"/>
</library>

<bell libraryRef="myJsonBindingProvider"/>

<library id="myJsonProcessingProvider">
  <file name="${path.to.json.processing.provider}"/>
</library>

<bell libraryRef="myJsonProcessingProvider"/>
----

> NOTE: When you enable `jsonb-3.0` or `jsonbContainer-3.0` the `jsonp-2.1` feature is automatically enabled. However, enabling the `jsonpContainer-2.1` feature will supersede the `jsonp-2.1` feature and allow the user to provide a third-party implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: When you enable `jsonb-3.0` or `jsonbContainer-3.0` the `jsonp-2.1` feature is automatically enabled. However, enabling the `jsonpContainer-2.1` feature supersedes the `jsonp-2.1` feature and allows you to provide a third-party implementation.
```

> NOTE: When you enable `jsonb-3.0` or `jsonbContainer-3.0` the `jsonp-2.1` feature is automatically enabled. However, enabling the `jsonpContainer-2.1` feature will supersede the `jsonp-2.1` feature and allow the user to provide a third-party implementation.

Reviewer 5: Remove "NOTE:" - it's not necessary.
Add a comma after jsonbContainer-3.0.

I don't understand how to read the second sentence - it needs wording more clearly - I'm not sure what the point is that's being made?

Reviewer 5: Maybe this information should just be provided in the relevant paragraphs above instead of being pulled out as a separate "note"?

> You can find out more about this specific update (eg Open Liberty docs, Javadoc) and/or the wider technology via the following links:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find out more about this specific update and the wider technology with the following links:
```

* link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/json-p-b.html[Open Liberty JSON-P and JSON-B Documentation]
* link:https://javaee.github.io/jsonp/getting-started.html[Jakarta JSON Processing - Getting Started]
* link:https://javaee.github.io/jsonb-spec/getting-started.html[Jakarta JSON Binding - Getting Started]
* link:{url-prefix}/guides/rest-client-java.html[Open Liberty REST Client Guide]

[#cdi]
== CDI 4.0

> CDI allows objects to be bound to lifecycle contexts, to be injected, to be associated with interceptors and decorators, and to interact in a loosely coupled fashion by firing and observing events.

Reviewer 5: This whole section (under the CDI 4.0 heading) needs some work. The bulleted list format is too long to read and make sense of (too many items in no particular order). This blog post isn't just release notes for existing developers but needs to be appealing to new developers so that they can see how great CDI is and what it can do for them, and why they should try using Jakarta EE 10/MicroProfile at all.

In the introductory para, can we explain in a sentence each what the Annotations and Interceptors APIs provide (for someone new to CDI)?

Remove "As part of Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile," as it doesn't really add anything to that sentence in the context of this blog post.

"brings some functional updates" doesn't really tell us anything - what are the really key changes in this release that are likely to be of interest to the most developers? Surely all the changes aren't really minimal and equally mundane?

What's "Build Compatible Extensions" and "a new Metamodel" mean? What benefit do these changes have to a developer? And why is that change different from the bulleted list below it - is it more important?

Can the updates that are currently in the long bulleted list be grouped in some way and then each group have at least an introductory couple of sentences explaining why the changes have been made at a higher level? For example, "The following APIs were deprecated in previous releases of Open Liberty and have now been removed:.....list of changes here....If your application uses these APIs, it will xxxx so you need to update them to xxx."

Maybe use the words/groupings from the original bulleted list at the top of the post? "defining new extension APIs; removing reflections; adding new reflection-free language model; empty beans.xml means that only annotated classes are beans; removal of deprecated APIs".

Author: @tevans78 ^

Reviewer 6: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/blogs/pull/2427

> As part of Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile, CDI 4.0 brings some functional updates and removes some previously deprecated APIs. This update also brings in new EE 10 versions of the Jakarta Annotations and Jakarta Interceptors APIs.

Reviewer 5: Never "EE 10", always "Jakarta EE 10"

Author: ```suggestion
As part of Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile, CDI 4.0 brings some functional updates and removes some previously deprecated APIs. This update also brings in new Jakarta EE 10 versions of the Jakarta Annotations and Jakarta Interceptors APIs.
```

> As part of Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile, CDI 4.0 brings some functional updates and removes some previously deprecated APIs. This update also brings in new EE 10 versions of the Jakarta Annotations and Jakarta Interceptors APIs.

Author: ```suggestion
As part of Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile, CDI 4.0 brings some functional updates and removes some previously deprecated APIs. This update also brings in new Jakarta EE 10 versions of the Jakarta Annotations and Jakarta Interceptors APIs.
```

Support has been added for Build Compatibile Extensions, along with a new Metamodel that is less dependent on reflection at runtime.

[source, java]

> ----

Reviewer: what does this example show? a short introductory sentence would clarify

Author: @tevans78 ^

public class MyExtension implements BuildCompatibleExtension {
    @Enhancement(type=MyFooService.class)
    public void foo(ClassConfig clazz) {
        clazz.addAnnotation(MyQualifier.class)
    }
}
----

* In previous versions of CDI, an empty `beans.xml` file indicated that an archive should be treated as an Explicit Bean Archive (the equivalent of `bean-discovery-mode="all"`). In CDI 4.0, an empty `beans.xml` will now cause an archive to be treated as an Implicit Bean Archive (the equivalent of `bean-discovery-mode="annotated"`). Should it be needed, a configuration option has been provided to enable compatibility with previous versions.

> 

Reviewer: I'd recommend removing the bullets, since the blogs site reduces the font size for bulleted lists, it looks like all these details are fine print

> * In previous versions of CDI, a non-empty `beans.xml` file which did not include a version attribute was defaulted to mean `bean-discovery-mode="all"`. In CDI 4.0, it will now default to `bean-discovery-mode="annotated"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In previous versions of CDI, a non-empty `beans.xml` file that did not include a version attribute defaulted to mean `bean-discovery-mode="all"`. In CDI 4.0, it defaults to `bean-discovery-mode="annotated"`.
```

> * Two new Observable Container State Events have been added; Startup and Shutdown. Applications can listen for these events to be notified when the CDI container is starting up and being shut down.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two new Observable Container State Events are added: Startup and Shutdown. Applications can listen for these events to be notified when the CDI container is starting up and being shut down.
```

> * A new Handle API is added to make programatic lookup of Beans and Instances easier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new Handle API is added to make programatic lookup of Beans and Instances easier.
```

> * (Jakarta Annotations 2.1) The `@priority` annotation can now be applied to any program element. This is used by CDI 4.0 to allow Stereotypes to include a Pritory annotation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Jakarta Annotations 2.1, the `@priority` annotation can now be applied to any program element. This annotation is used by CDI 4.0 to allow Stereotypes to include a Priority annotation.
```

> * (Jakarta Annotations 2.1) The `@priority` annotation can now be applied to any program element. This is used by CDI 4.0 to allow Stereotypes to include a Pritory annotation.

Reviewer 5: Typo in Priority annotation

> * Some previously deprecated CDI APIs have been removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following previously deprecated CDI APIs are removed.
```

> ** @New qualifier

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `@New qualifier`, which is replaced by `@dependent` beans in CDI 1.1 and later.
```

> *** Replaced by `@dependent` beans (since CDI 1.1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> ** Bean#isNullable()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `Bean#isNullable()`, which has not been used by the implementation since CDI 1.1.
```

> *** Not used by the implementation (since CDI 1.1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> ** BeanManager#fireEvent()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `BeanManager#fireEvent()`. Use `BeanManager.getEvent()` instead in CDI 2.0 and later. 
```

> *** Use `BeanManager.getEvent()` instead (since CDI 2.0)

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> ** BeanManager#createInjectionTarget(AnnotatedType)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `BeanManager#createInjectionTarget(AnnotatedType)`, which is replaced by `BeanManager#getInjectionTargetFactory(AnnotatedType)` in CDI 1.1 and later.
```

> *** Replaced by `BeanManager#getInjectionTargetFactory(AnnotatedType)` (since CDI 1.1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> ** BeforeBeanDiscovery#addAnnotatedType(AnnotatedType)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `BeforeBeanDiscovery#addAnnotatedType(AnnotatedType)`, which is replaced by `BeforeBeanDiscovery#addAnnotatedType(AnnotatedType, String)` in CDI 1.1 and later.
```

> *** Replaced by `BeforeBeanDiscovery#addAnnotatedType(AnnotatedType, String)` (since CDI 1.1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> * The Liberty configuration element has been superseded by a new element that applies to all versions of CDI (1.2 and newer).

Reviewer: which previous config element is replaced by which new element?

Author: @tevans78

Reviewer 7: This line shouldn't be in the bulleted list in my opinion.

[source, xml]
----
<cdi enableImplicitBeanArchives="false" emptyBeansXmlCDI3Compatibility="true"/>
----

> * The attribute `enableImplicitBeanArchives` is the same as it was in previous versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `enableImplicitBeanArchives` attribute is the same as it was in previous versions.
```

> If set to `true` (default) then archives which do not contain a `beans.xml` file will be treated as Implicit Bean Archives and will be scanned for classes that have Bean Defining Annotations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If set to `true`, which is the default, then archives that do not contain a `beans.xml` file are treated as Implicit Bean Archives and scanned for classes that have Bean Defining Annotations.
```

> If set to `false` then archives which do not contain a `beans.xml` file will be not be scanned for annotated classes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If set to `false`, then archives that do not contain a `beans.xml` file are not scanned for annotated classes.
```

> * The attribute `emptyBeansXmlCDI3Compatibility` only applies to CDI 4.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `emptyBeansXmlCDI3Compatibility` attribute applies only to CDI 4.0.
```

> If set to `true` then an archive which contains an empty `beans.xml` file will be treated as an Explicit Bean Archive (as it was in CDI 3.0 and earlier)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If set to `true`, then an archive that contains an empty `beans.xml` file is treated as an Explicit Bean Archive, as it was in CDI 3.0 and earlier.
```

> * If set to `false` (default) then an archive which contains an empty `beans.xml` file will be treated as an Implicit Bean Archive. This is the equivalent to setting `bean-discovery-mode="annotated"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If set to `false`, which is the default, then an archive that contains an empty `beans.xml` file is treated as an Implicit Bean Archive. This is equivalent to setting `bean-discovery-mode="annotated"`.
```

[source, xml]
----
<featureManager>
  <feature>cdi-4.0</feature>
</featureManager>

<cdi enableImplicitBeanArchives="false" emptyBeansXmlCDI3Compatibility="true"/>
----

[#expression]
== Jakarta EE 10 Expression Language 5.0

> The `expressionLanguage-5.0` feature is an implementation of the Expression Language 5.0 specification for Jakarta EE 10. The Expression Language 5.0 includes a number of new features and specification clarifications.

Reviewer 5: Remove this paragraph as it doesn't tell the reader anything of value.

Reviewer 5: Instead, open with a sentence or two describing what value Expression Language gives a developer - what's the point of the feature (what would be lost if we didn't have it?)?

Author: @pnickoll @volosied ^

> To learn about the changes between the Expression Language 4.0 and Expression Language 5.0, reference the  link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/jakarta-expression-language-spec-5.0.html#changes-between-5-0-and-4-0[Expression Language 5.0 spec documentation].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn about the changes between the Expression Language 4.0 and Expression Language 5.0, see the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/jakarta-expression-language-spec-5.0.html#changes-between-5-0-and-4-0[Expression Language 5.0 spec documentation].
```

> To learn about the changes between the Expression Language 4.0 and Expression Language 5.0, reference the  link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/jakarta-expression-language-spec-5.0.html#changes-between-5-0-and-4-0[Expression Language 5.0 spec documentation].

Reviewer 5: Remove this paragraph - don't tell the reader to "go read the spec". Provide them with the basic info they need here, then link to the relevant topics in the OL docs. In a beta, the docs might not yet be written so, in the case, if necessary link to the spec for more info at the end of the section.

> One of the new features is the addition of the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/apidocs/jakarta.el/jakarta/el/methodreference[MethodReference] which "Provides information about the method to which a method expression resolves." This new class allows developers to access any annotations present on a particular method using the `getAnnotations()` method. There are also a few deprecations and clarifications within the Expression Language 5.0 Specification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the new features is the addition of the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/apidocs/jakarta.el/jakarta/el/methodreference[MethodReference] which "...provides information about the method to which a method expression resolves." This new class aenables you to access any annotations that are present on a particular method by using the `getAnnotations()` method. The Expression Language 5.0 specification also includes a few deprecations and clarifications.
```

> One of the new features is the addition of the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/apidocs/jakarta.el/jakarta/el/methodreference[MethodReference] which "Provides information about the method to which a method expression resolves." This new class allows developers to access any annotations present on a particular method using the `getAnnotations()` method. There are also a few deprecations and clarifications within the Expression Language 5.0 Specification.

Reviewer 5: This is the key bit of info for this section. But change the sentence to start "Expression Language 5.0 provides a new class called MethodReference. This new class enables developers to access...." etc.

[source,xml]
----
   <featureManager>
        <feature>expressionLanguage-5.0</feature>
    </featureManager>
----

> More information regarding Jakarta Expression Language 5.0 can be  found on the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about Jakarta Expression Language 5.0, see the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/[jakarta.ee site].
```

> link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/[jakarta.ee site].

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/[jakarta.ee site].

Reviewer 5: instead of "found on the jakarta.ee site" say "see the Expression Language 5.0 specification" (assuming it's necessary to refer to). Be explicit about what the link is pointing to (ie it's not pointing to the whole Jakarta.ee site).

[#microprofile]
== MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1 

> OpenAPI is a standardised way of documenting REST APIs in a JSON or YAML format. MicroProfile OpenAPI helps you generate and serve OpenAPI documentation for your REST applications built using JAX-RS or Jakarta restfulWS. This can be useful for developers to test out the API during development, or for people using the API in production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenAPI is a standardised way of documenting REST APIs in a JSON or YAML format. It helps you generate and serve OpenAPI documentation for your REST applications that are built by using JAX-RS or Jakarta restfulWS. This can be useful for developers to test out the API during development, or for people using the API in production.
```

> OpenAPI is a standardised way of documenting REST APIs in a JSON or YAML format. MicroProfile OpenAPI helps you generate and serve OpenAPI documentation for your REST applications built using JAX-RS or Jakarta restfulWS. This can be useful for developers to test out the API during development, or for people using the API in production.

Reviewer 5: "Jakarta restfulWS"?

Reviewer 4: Sorry I've used the feature short name by mistake, it should be the full name for the spec: "Jakarta RESTful Web Services"

```suggestion
OpenAPI is a standardised way of documenting REST APIs in a JSON or YAML format. MicroProfile OpenAPI helps you generate and serve OpenAPI documentation for your REST applications built using JAX-RS or Jakarta RESTful Web Services. This can be useful for developers to test out the API during development, or for people using the API in production.
```

> To use it, add the `mpOpenAPI-3.1` feature to your server.xml, deploy your rest application and then visit `/openapi` to view the OpenAPI documentation, or visit `/openapi/ui` for a user interface that lets you browse through it. You can enhance the documentation using annotations to add things like textual descriptions to each method. The annotations are available as a maven dependency:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use it, add the `mpOpenAPI-3.1` feature to your server.xml, deploy your rest application and then visit the `/openapi` endpoint to view the OpenAPI documentation, or visit `/openapi/ui` for a user interface where you can browse through it. You can enhance the documentation by using annotations to add things like textual descriptions to each method. The annotations are available as a maven dependency:
```

[source, xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.eclipse.microprofile.openapi</groupId>
    <artifactId>microprofile-openapi-api</artifactId>
    <version>3.1-RC2</version>
</dependency>
----

> Version 3.1 is a minor release which includes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Version 3.1 is a minor release that includes the following updates:
```

> Version 3.1 is a minor release which includes:

Reviewer 5: Move this paragraph (inc the list) to before the "To use it,..." paragraph. Tell them what's new before you tell them how to use it.

> * Some Jakarta Bean Validation annotations will now be read and their restrictions will be added to object schemas

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Some Jakarta Bean Validation annotations will now be read and their restrictions will be added to object schemas.
```

> * Most annotations now include an `extension` attribute

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Most annotations now include an `extension` attribute.
```

> * `@SecurityRequirementsSet` can now be used to document operations where authentication is optional or where more than one authentication mechanism is required

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `@SecurityRequirementsSet` can now be used to document operations where authentication is optional or where more than one authentication mechanism is required.
```

> More information about MicroProfile OpenAPI can be found in:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about MicroProfile OpenAPI, see the following links:
```

* link:{url-prefix}/guides/microprofile-openapi.html[Open Liberty MicroProfile OpenAPI guide]
* link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/documentation-openapi.html[Open Liberty OpenAPI documentation]
* link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-open-api-3.1-RC2/apidocs/[MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1 Javadoc]
* link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-open-api-3.1-RC2/microprofile-openapi-spec-3.1-RC2.html[MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1 Specification]

[#password]
== Password Utilities 1.1 

> 

Reviewer 5: I don't understand this section or how this new feature benefits the user. Why is forceful federation a problem? And if this feature is new, what was it that used to start the federatedRegistry feature or the Jakarta Connectors feature anyway?

Also, use the proper names of the features consistently. If it's important to know which feature and which version, use the configuration name (eg federatedRegistry-1.0), but in general use the proper name of it (eg Federated User Registry feature).

Author: @jvanhill ^

> The new `passwordUtilities-1.1` feature has been created to no longer start the `federatedRegistry-1.0` feature or the Jakarta Connectors feature. The new feature is part of core edition, whereas the `passwordUtilities-1.0` feature is part of base edition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The new `passwordUtilities-1.1` feature no longer starts the `federatedRegistry-1.0` feature or the Jakarta Connectors feature. 
```

> The new `passwordUtilities-1.1` feature has been created to no longer start the `federatedRegistry-1.0` feature or the Jakarta Connectors feature. The new feature is part of core edition, whereas the `passwordUtilities-1.0` feature is part of base edition.

Reviewer 5: What do "core edition" and "base edition" refer to? Editions of what?

Author: I've removed it as it's not applicable to Open Liberty

> Stand-alone user registries will no longer be forcefully federated, which sometimes results in slightly different behavior. The password utilities APIs can now be used in core edition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stand-alone user registries are no longer forcefully federated, which sometimes results in slightly different behavior. The password utilities APIs can now be used in core edition.
```

> Add the `passwordUtilities-1.1` feature to the list of features in the server.xml file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the `passwordUtilities-1.1` feature to the list of features in your server.xml file:
```

[source, xml]
----
<featureManager>
    <feature>passwordUtilities-1.1</feature>
</featureManager>
----

> For more information regarding the Password Utilities, check out the link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/passwordUtilities.html[feature documentation].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about the Password Utilities, check out the link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/passwordUtilities.html[feature documentation].
```

[#run]
=== Try it now 

To try out these features, just update your build tools to pull the Open Liberty All Beta Features package instead of the main release. The beta works with Java SE 18, Java SE 17, Java SE 11, and Java SE 8.

If you're using link:{url-prefix}/guides/maven-intro.html[Maven], here are the coordinates:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>io.openliberty.beta</groupId>
  <artifactId>openliberty-runtime</artifactId>
  <version>22.0.0.9-beta </version>
  <type>pom</type>
</dependency>
----

Or for link:{url-prefix}/guides/gradle-intro.html[Gradle]:

[source,gradle]
----
dependencies {
    libertyRuntime group: 'io.openliberty.beta', name: 'openliberty-runtime', version: '[22.0.0.9-beta ,)'
}
----

Or take a look at our link:{url-prefix}/downloads/#runtime_betas[Downloads page].

[#feedback]

> == Your feedback is welcomed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== We welcome your feedback 
```

Reviewer 5: We should update the template...

Author: This is from the template; if we want the suggestion moving forward, the template should be updated @dmuelle @lauracowen

** Jakarta Interceptors 2.1: picking up the changes from Annotation 2.1

In addition to the Core Profile features, Jakarta EE 10 Expression Language 5.0 is included in this beta and provides new features and specification clarifications.   

But it's not only Jakarta EE features that are debuting in this release!  MicroProfile OpenAPI is updated to version 3.1, in which you can specify optional authentication for operations and multiple annotation enhancements.  Last but not least, Password Utilities 1.1 is introduced in this beta, which no longer forcefully federates stand-alone user registries.

The link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 22.0.0.9-beta includes the following beta features (along with link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/feature-overview.html[all GA features]):

* Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile
** <<restful, RESTful Web Services 3.1>>
** <<json, Jakarta JSON Binding and Processing>>
** <<cdi, CDI 4.0>>
* <<expression, Jakarta EE 10 Expression Language 5.0>>
* <<microprofile, MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1>>
* <<password, Password Utilities 1.1>>

[#restful]
== RESTful Web Services 3.1

> RESTful Web Services 3.1 (also known as Jakarta Rest 3.1 and formerly known as JAX-RS) is now available in the Open Liberty 22.0.0.9 beta. The 3.1 implementation is based on RESTEasy and is  an EE10 technology, which uses the `jakarta.*` package name. For more information on the changes in this release, see the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/3.1/jakarta-restful-ws-spec-3.1.html#changes-since-3.0-release[Changes Since 3.0 Release section] of the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/3.1/jakarta-restful-ws-spec-3.1.html[Jakarta RESTful Web Services Spec].

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Jakarta RESTful Web Services 3.1 (also known as Jakarta Rest 3.1 and formerly known as JAX-RS) is now available in the Open Liberty 22.0.0.9 beta. The 3.1 implementation is based on RESTEasy and is  an EE10 technology, which uses the `jakarta.*` package name. For more information on the changes in this release, see the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/3.1/jakarta-restful-ws-spec-3.1.html#changes-since-3.0-release[Changes Since 3.0 Release section] of the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/3.1/jakarta-restful-ws-spec-3.1.html[Jakarta RESTful Web Services Spec].
```

Give it a try - and if you encounter any issues, please let us know!

> You can enable RESTful Web Services 3.1 by using the `restfulWS-3.1` feature in your `server.xml` file. If you only need a RESTful client,  use the `restfulWSClient-3.1` feature instead.

Reviewer 7: Should there be an xml snippet with the featureManager like in the other features?

To learn more about RESTful Web Services or see what is coming in future releases, visit the link:https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/ee4j.rest[ EE4J community page].

[#json]
== Jakarta JSON Binding and Processing
The Jakarta JSON Processing specification enables you to parse and generate JSON strings. The Jakarta JSON Binding specification is built on top of JSON Processing and enables you to serialize and deserialize Java objects into JSON.

> The Jakarta JSON Processing specification has been updated with enhancements for handling duplicate keys when parsing JSON, and better handling of `java.lang.Number` superclass when generating JSON strings. The Jakarta JSON Binding specification has been updated to support polymorphism. 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The Jakarta JSON Processing specification has been updated with enhancements for handling duplicate keys when parsing JSON, and better handling of the `java.lang.Number` superclass when generating JSON strings. The Jakarta JSON Binding specification has been updated to support polymorphism. 
```

[source, java]
----
public class MyExtension implements BuildCompatibleExtension {
    @Enhancement(type=MyFooService.class)
    public void foo(ClassConfig clazz) {
        clazz.addAnnotation(MyQualifier.class)
    }
}
----

In previous versions of CDI, an empty `beans.xml` file indicated that an archive should be treated as an Explicit Bean Archive (the equivalent of `bean-discovery-mode="all"`). In CDI 4.0, an empty `beans.xml` will now cause an archive to be treated as an Implicit Bean Archive (the equivalent of `bean-discovery-mode="annotated"`). Should it be needed, a configuration option has been provided to enable compatibility with previous versions.

In previous versions of CDI, a non-empty `beans.xml` file that did not include a version attribute defaulted to mean `bean-discovery-mode="all"`. In CDI 4.0, it defaults to `bean-discovery-mode="annotated"`.

Two new Observable Container State Events are added: Startup and Shutdown. Applications can listen for these events to be notified when the CDI container is starting up and being shut down.

A new Handle API is added to make programatic lookup of Beans and Instances easier.

> In Jakarta Annotations 2.1, the `@priority` annotation can now be applied to any program element. This annotation is used by CDI 4.0 to allow Stereotypes to include a Priority annotation.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
In Jakarta Annotations 2.1, the `@Priority` annotation can now be applied to any program element. This annotation is used by CDI 4.0 to allow Stereotypes to include a Priority annotation.
```

* `BeanManager#createInjectionTarget(AnnotatedType)`, which is replaced by `BeanManager#getInjectionTargetFactory(AnnotatedType)` in CDI 1.1 and later.

* `BeforeBeanDiscovery#addAnnotatedType(AnnotatedType)`, which is replaced by `BeforeBeanDiscovery#addAnnotatedType(AnnotatedType, String)` in CDI 1.1 and later.

* The Liberty configuration element has been superseded by a new element that applies to all versions of CDI (1.2 and newer).

[source, xml]
----
<cdi enableImplicitBeanArchives="false" emptyBeansXmlCDI3Compatibility="true"/>
----

The `enableImplicitBeanArchives` attribute is the same as it was in previous versions.
If set to `true`, which is the default, then archives that do not contain a `beans.xml` file are treated as Implicit Bean Archives and scanned for classes that have Bean Defining Annotations.
If set to `false`, then archives that do not contain a `beans.xml` file are not scanned for annotated classes.

The `emptyBeansXmlCDI3Compatibility` attribute applies only to CDI 4.0.
If set to `true`, then an archive that contains an empty `beans.xml` file is treated as an Explicit Bean Archive, as it was in CDI 3.0 and earlier.

> 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 7: unnecessary after the rewrite.

If set to `false`, which is the default, then an archive that contains an empty `beans.xml` file is treated as an Implicit Bean Archive. This is equivalent to setting `bean-discovery-mode="annotated"`.

[source, xml]
----
<featureManager>
  <feature>cdi-4.0</feature>
</featureManager>

<cdi enableImplicitBeanArchives="false" emptyBeansXmlCDI3Compatibility="true"/>
----

[#expression]
== Jakarta EE 10 Expression Language 5.0

Jakarta EE 10 Expression Language 5.0 includes a number of new features, deprecations, and specification clarifications.  One of the new features is the addition of the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/apidocs/jakarta.el/jakarta/el/methodreference[MethodReference] which "Provides information about the method to which a method expression resolves." This new class allows developers to access any annotations present on a particular method using the `getAnnotations()` method.

To enable Expression Language 5.0, add the `expressionLanguage-5.0` feature to the list of features in your server.xml file:
[source,xml]
----

>    <featureManager>
>         <feature>expressionLanguage-5.0</feature>
>     </featureManager>

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
<featureManager>
  <feature>expressionLanguage-5.0</feature>
</featureManager>
```

Reviewer 7: There is an extra space for `</featureManager>` for this one and mpOpenAPI-3.1.  I was also trying to make them all consistent since there is inconsistent spacing in the examples.

----

More information about Expression Language 5.0 can be found in: 

* link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/jakarta-expression-language-spec-5.0.html#changes-between-5-0-and-4-0[Changes between the Expression Language 4.0 and Expression Language 5.0]

* link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/[Expression Language 5.0 specification]

* link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/expressionLanguage.html[Open Liberty Expression Language feature documentation]

[#microprofile]
== MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1 

OpenAPI is a standardised way of documenting REST APIs in a JSON or YAML format. It helps you generate and serve OpenAPI documentation for your REST applications that are built by using JAX-RS or Jakarta restfulWS. This can be useful for developers to test out the API during development, or for people using the API in production.

To use MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1, add the `mpOpenAPI-3.1` feature to your server.xml:
[source,xml]
----
   <featureManager>
        <feature>mpOpenAPI-3.1</feature>
    </featureManager>
----

>  Next, deploy your rest application and then visit the `/openapi` endpoint to view the OpenAPI documentation, or visit `/openapi/ui` for a user interface where you can browse through it. You can enhance the documentation by using annotations to add things like textual descriptions to each method. The annotations are available as a maven dependency:

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Next, deploy your rest application and then visit the `/openapi` endpoint to view the OpenAPI documentation, or visit `/openapi/ui` for a user interface where you can browse through it. You can enhance the documentation by using annotations to add things like textual descriptions to each method. The annotations are available as a maven dependency:
```

Reviewer 7: This extra space appears to cause the markdown to do weird things at least in the preview.

[source, xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.eclipse.microprofile.openapi</groupId>
    <artifactId>microprofile-openapi-api</artifactId>
    <version>3.1-RC2</version>
</dependency>
----

Version 3.1 is a minor release that includes the following updates:

* Some Jakarta Bean Validation annotations will now be read and their restrictions will be added to object schemas.
* Most annotations now include an `extension` attribute.

> * `@SecurityRequirementsSet` can now be used to document operations where authentication is optional or where more than one authentication mechanism is required.

Reviewer 7: I would put this before the `To use MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1` paragraph.  That is how the other ones are formatted, 1.  Explain what is changed, 2.  Show how to use it, 3.  Provide links to find more information.

For more information about MicroProfile OpenAPI, see the following links:

* link:{url-prefix}/guides/microprofile-openapi.html[Open Liberty MicroProfile OpenAPI guide]
* link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/documentation-openapi.html[Open Liberty OpenAPI documentation]
* link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-open-api-3.1-RC2/apidocs/[MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1 Javadoc]
* link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-open-api-3.1-RC2/microprofile-openapi-spec-3.1-RC2.html[MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1 specification]

[#password]
== Password Utilities 1.1 

>   The new `passwordUtilities-1.1` feature no longer starts the `federatedRegistry-1.0` feature or the Jakarta Connectors feature. 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The new `passwordUtilities-1.1` feature no longer starts the `federatedRegistry-1.0` feature or the Jakarta Connectors feature. 
```

Reviewer 7: The extra space appears to do weird things in the markdown at least in the preview.

Stand-alone user registries are no longer forcefully federated, which sometimes results in slightly different behavior. The password utilities APIs can now be used in core edition.

To enable Password Utilities 1.1, add the `passwordUtilities-1.1` feature to the list of features in your server.xml file:

[source, xml]
----
<featureManager>
    <feature>passwordUtilities-1.1</feature>
</featureManager>
----

For more information about the Password Utilities, check out the link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/passwordUtilities.html[feature documentation].

[#run]
=== Try it now 

> To try out these features, just update your build tools to pull the Open Liberty All Beta Features package instead of the main release. The beta works with Java SE 18, Java SE 17, Java SE 11, and Java SE 8.

Reviewer 7: The Jakarta EE 10 features have a minimum Java requirement of Java 11 per the spec.  Do we want to update this statement to add something about those features not working with Java SE 8?  Otherwise this seems to be misleading.

Author: ```suggestion
To try out these features, just update your build tools to pull the Open Liberty All Beta Features package instead of the main release. The beta works with Java SE 18, Java SE 17, Java SE 11, and Java SE 8, however, the Jakarta EE 10 features are only compatible with Java SE 11 and above.
```

If you're using link:{url-prefix}/guides/maven-intro.html[Maven], here are the coordinates:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>io.openliberty.beta</groupId>
  <artifactId>openliberty-runtime</artifactId>

>   <version>22.0.0.9-beta </version>

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  <version>22.0.0.9-beta</version>
```

# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/reece-nana
author_github: https://github.com/reece-nana
seo-title: Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile debuts in Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta brings you the hot-off-the-press Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile. Jakarta EE 10 is the first release to update the Jakarta EE specifications since Java EE 8 in 2017.  MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1 and Password Utilities 1.1 are also available in this beta release.
blog_description: Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta brings you the hot-off-the-press Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile. Jakarta EE 10 is the first release to update the Jakarta EE specifications since Java EE 8 in 2017.  MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1 and Password Utilities 1.1 are also available in this beta release
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
---
= Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile makes it debut in Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta
Reece Nana <https://github.com/reece-nana>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

> Open Liberty 22.0.0.9-beta brings you the hot-off-the-press link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/coreprofile/10/[Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile]. Jakarta EE 10 is the first release to update the Jakarta EE specifications since Java EE 8 in 2017. While the Jakarta EE 10 release is still around the corner, Open Liberty has consumed many of the Jakarta EE 10 specifications and put them in the 22.0.0.9-beta.  The features that make up the new Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile are available in this beta release. 

Reviewer 7: There was supposed to be an update in this blog post for the Jakarta Concurrency 3.0 feature (concurrent-3.0) as documented here:  https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/20014#issuecomment-1190373788.  @njr-11 did we decide not to do it?

Reviewer 7: The issue was tagged 22009-beta so it was supposed to be part of this beta blog as we had discussed in the Jakarta scrum.

Author: I think that's a good catch; I'm going to publish the blog as-is, and then make the update to add Concurrency 3.0.

To enable Expression Language 5.0, add the `expressionLanguage-5.0` feature to the list of features in your server.xml file:
[source,xml]
----
<featureManager>
  <feature>expressionLanguage-5.0</feature>
</featureManager>
----

More information about Expression Language 5.0 can be found in: 

* link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/jakarta-expression-language-spec-5.0.html#changes-between-5-0-and-4-0[Changes between the Expression Language 4.0 and Expression Language 5.0]

* link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/[Expression Language 5.0 specification]

* link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/expressionLanguage.html[Open Liberty Expression Language feature documentation]

[#microprofile]
== MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1 

> The link:https://swagger.io/specification/[OpenAPI specification] standardizes a way of documenting REST APIs in a JSON or YAML format. The link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-open-api-3.1-RC2/microprofile-openapi-spec-3.1-RC2.html[MicroProfile OpenAPI specification] helps you generate and serve OpenAPI documentation for your REST applications that are built by using JAX-RS or Jakarta restfulWS. This can be useful for developers to test out the API during development, or for people using the API in production.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The link:https://swagger.io/specification/[OpenAPI specification] standardizes a way of documenting REST APIs in a JSON or YAML format. The link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-open-api-3.1-RC2/microprofile-openapi-spec-3.1-RC2.html[MicroProfile OpenAPI specification] helps you generate and serve OpenAPI documentation for your REST applications that are built by using Jakarta RESTful Web Services. This can be useful for developers to test out the API during development, or for people using the API in production.
```

Reviewer 7: The reason I did that is because mpOpenAPI 3.1 does not work with Java / Jakarta EE 8 where it is called JAX-RS.  It only works with EE9 only today but eventually EE 10 only.

Reviewer 7: With that in mind do we need a statement about mpOpenAPI-3.1 only working with Jakarta EE 9 features and that it current doesn't work with Jakarta EE 10 because not all EE 10 features needed for mpOpenAPI feature are available yet in the beta?

Author: I guess it depends how one reads the sentence; "MicroProfile OpenAPI" broadly (in which case both apply) or specific to 3.1 (in which case just Jakarta would apply).
I'm wondering if I should leave it as is, and just point to a version agnostic link like
```suggestion
The link:https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/blob/main/versions/3.0.0.md[OpenAPI specification] standardizes a way of documenting REST APIs in a JSON or YAML format. The link:https://microprofile.io/project/eclipse/microprofile-open-api[MicroProfile OpenAPI specification] helps you generate and serve OpenAPI documentation for your REST applications that are built by using JAX-RS or Jakarta restfulWS. This can be useful for developers to test out the API during development, or for people using the API in production.
```

Reviewer 7: Can possibly do that.  but it should be Jakarta RESTful Web Services not Jakarta restfulWS

Author: udpated

</dependency>
----

For more information about MicroProfile OpenAPI, see the following links:

* link:{url-prefix}/guides/microprofile-openapi.html[Open Liberty MicroProfile OpenAPI guide]
* link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/documentation-openapi.html[Open Liberty OpenAPI documentation]
* link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-open-api-3.1-RC2/apidocs/[MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1 Javadoc]

[#password]
== Password Utilities 1.1 

The new `passwordUtilities-1.1` feature no longer starts the `federatedRegistry-1.0` feature or the Jakarta Connectors feature. 
Stand-alone user registries are no longer forcefully federated, which sometimes results in slightly different behavior. The password utilities APIs can now be used in core edition.

To enable Password Utilities 1.1, add the `passwordUtilities-1.1` feature to the list of features in your server.xml file:

[source, xml]
----
<featureManager>
    <feature>passwordUtilities-1.1</feature>
</featureManager>
----

For more information about the Password Utilities, check out the link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/passwordUtilities.html[feature documentation].

[#run]
=== Try it now 

> To try out these features, just update your build tools to pull the Open Liberty All Beta Features package instead of the main release. The beta works with Java SE 18, Java SE 17, Java SE 11, and Java SE 8, however, the Jakarta EE 10 features are only compatible with Java SE 11 and above.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
To try out these features, just update your build tools to pull the Open Liberty All Beta Features package instead of the main release. The beta works with Java SE 18, Java SE 17, Java SE 11, and Java SE 8, however, the Jakarta EE 10 features are only compatible with Java SE 11 and later.
```

That seems to be the general edit that the doc people suggest.

Author: updated

[source,xml]
----
   <featureManager>
        <feature>expressionLanguage-5.0</feature>
    </featureManager>
----

More information about Expression Language 5.0 can be found in: 

* link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/jakarta-expression-language-spec-5.0.html#changes-between-5-0-and-4-0[Changes between the Expression Language 4.0 and Expression Language 5.0]

* link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/[Expression Language 5.0 specification]

* link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/expressionLanguage.html[Open Liberty Expression Language feature documentation]

[#microprofile]
== MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1 

OpenAPI is a standardised way of documenting REST APIs in a JSON or YAML format. It helps you generate and serve OpenAPI documentation for your REST applications that are built by using JAX-RS or Jakarta restfulWS. This can be useful for developers to test out the API during development, or for people using the API in production.

To use MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1, add the `mpOpenAPI-3.1` feature to your server.xml:
[source,xml]
----

>    <featureManager>
>         <feature>mpOpenAPI-3.1</feature>
>     </featureManager>

Author: ```suggestion
<featureManager>
    <feature>mpOpenAPI-3.1</feature>
</featureManager>
```

* link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/documentation-openapi.html[Open Liberty OpenAPI documentation]
* link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-open-api-3.1-RC2/apidocs/[MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1 Javadoc]
* link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-open-api-3.1-RC2/microprofile-openapi-spec-3.1-RC2.html[MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1 specification]

[#password]
== Password Utilities 1.1 

  The new `passwordUtilities-1.1` feature no longer starts the `federatedRegistry-1.0` feature or the Jakarta Connectors feature. 
Stand-alone user registries are no longer forcefully federated, which sometimes results in slightly different behavior. The password utilities APIs can now be used in core edition.

To enable Password Utilities 1.1, add the `passwordUtilities-1.1` feature to the list of features in your server.xml file:

[source, xml]
----
<featureManager>
    <feature>passwordUtilities-1.1</feature>
</featureManager>
----

For more information about the Password Utilities, check out the link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/passwordUtilities.html[feature documentation].

[#run]
=== Try it now 

> To try out these features, just update your build tools to pull the Open Liberty All Beta Features package instead of the main release. The beta works with Java SE 18, Java SE 17, Java SE 11, and Java SE 8.

Author: ```suggestion
To try out these features, just update your build tools to pull the Open Liberty All Beta Features package instead of the main release. The beta works with Java SE 18, Java SE 17, Java SE 11, and Java SE 8, however, the Jakarta EE 10 features are only compatible with Java SE 11 and above.
```

    </featureManager>
----

More information regarding Jakarta Expression Language 5.0 can be  found on the 
link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/[jakarta.ee site].
For more information about Jakarta Expression Language 5.0, see the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/expression-language/5.0/[jakarta.ee site].

[#microprofile]
== MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1 

> OpenAPI is a standardised way of documenting REST APIs in a JSON or YAML format. MicroProfile OpenAPI helps you generate and serve OpenAPI documentation for your REST applications built using JAX-RS or Jakarta restfulWS. This can be useful for developers to test out the API during development, or for people using the API in production.

Reviewer 4: This change is wrong.

* **OpenAPI** is multi-language way of documenting REST APIs
* **MicroProfile OpenAPI** is a standard for Java application servers to generate documentation for JAX-RS applications in the OpenAPI format.

How should we reword this section to make the difference clearer? The difference is super important.

Reviewer 4: Eurgh, github isn't showing the right bit of code.

The original text makes a distinction between OpenAPI and MicroProfile OpenAPI. The current text has removed this distinction and is incorrect:

> OpenAPI is a standardised way of documenting REST APIs in a JSON or YAML format. It helps you generate and serve OpenAPI documentation for your REST applications that are built by using JAX-RS or Jakarta restfulWS. This can be useful for developers to test out the API during development, or for people using the API in production.

Author: fixed
